setting is
open the court meets today to deliver
its open court U its decision on the
request for the modification of the
order of March 28
2024 regarding provisional measures
submitted by South Africa on May 10
2024 in the case concerning application
of the convention on the prevention and
Punishment of the crime of genocide in
the Gaza Strip South Africa versus
Israel for reasons made known to me
judges Abraham Shue and iwasawa who duly
participated in the debation and the
final vote are not in a position to take
their seat on the bench
today judge ad hok Barak who also duly
participated
and the deliberations and the final vote
is unable to join us today for family
reasons I recall that on December 29
2023 South
Africa filed in the registry of the
Court an application instituting
proceedings against
Israel concerning alleged violations in
the Gaza Strip of obligations under the
convention on the prevention and
Punishment of the crime of
genocide to which I shall refer as the
genocide
convention the application of South
Africa contained a request for the
indication of provisional
measures after hearing thearters the
court indicated certain provisional
measures by an order issued on January
2024 by a letter dated February 12th
2024 South Africa referring to I quote
the developing circumstan in Rafa end of
quote called upon the court urgently to
exercise its power under article 75
paragraph 1 of the rules of
Court the registar informed the parties
of cour decision in respon to that
communication by letter on 16 February
2024 on March 6th
2024 South Africa requested the court I
quote to indicate further provisional
measures and or to modify its
provisional measures indicated on
January 26
24 by an order of March 28th
2024 the court reaffirmed the
provisional measures indicated in order
of January 26 2024 and indicated certain
additional Pro provisional
measures on May 10 2024 South Africa
submitted to the court what it described
as an urgent request for the
modification and indication of
provisional
measures pursuant to article 41 of the
statute and articles 75 and 76 of the
rules of
court in accordance with usual practice
I shall not read the introduction
paragraphs of the
althor which set out the procedural
history of the case I shall also omit or
summarize some other
paragraphs I shall therefore Begin by
reading the order at paragraph
20 the court Begins by noting that in
its View South Africa's present request
is a request for the mod modification of
the order of March 28 2024
for this reason the court must determine
whether the conditions set forth in
article 76 paragraph 1 of the rules of
Court have been
fulfilled that paragraph reads as follow
I quote at the request of a party or
prop otu the court May at any time
before the final judgment in the case
revoke or modify any decision concerning
provisional measures
if in its opinion some change in the
situation justifies such such revocation
or modification end of
Court the court must first ascertain
whether taking into account the
information that the parties have
provided with respect to the current
situation there is reason to conclude
that the situation that warranted the
decision set out in its order of March 2
8 2024 has changed since that time that
time if the court find that there was a
change in the situation since the
delivery of its earlier order it will
then have to consider whether such a
change justifies a modification of its
earlier decision concerning provisional
measures any such modification would be
appropriate only if the general
conditions leted down in article 41 of
the statute of the Court were also met
in this
instance the court thus Begins by
determining whether there has been a
change in the situation that warranted
the decision set out in its order of
March 28
2024 the court recalls that its order of
January 26
2024 it noted that the military
operation conducted by Israel following
the attack of October 7
2023 had resulted in I quote a large
number of deaths and injuries as well as
the massive destruction of homes the
forceable displacement of the vast
majority of the population and extensive
damage to civilian
infrastructure end of
quote in its decision communicate to the
parties by letters of 16 February
2024 the court noted quoting the United
Nations Secretary General that the
developments in the Gaza Strip and Rafa
in particular I quote would
exponentially increase what was already
a humanitarian nightmare with Untold
Regional consequences end of
quote the court further recalls that in
its order of March 28
2024 it observed with regret that the
catastrophic living conditions of the
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip had
deteriorated further since January
2024 especially in view of the prolonged
and widespread deprivation of food and
other basic necessities to where the
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip had been
subjected
in the present order the court notes
that the catastrophic humanitarian
situation in the Gaza
Strip which as stated in its order of
January 26
2024 was a serious risk of deteriorating
has deteriorated and has done so even
further since the court adopted its
order of March 28
2024 in this regard the court observes
that the concern that it expressed in
its decision communicate with the
departs on February 16
2024 with respect to the developments in
Rafa have
materialized and that the humanitarian
situation is now to be characterized as
disastrous after weeks of
intensification of military bombardments
of Rafa were more than million
Palestinians had fled as a result of
Israeli evacuation orders covering more
than 34s of gaza's entire territory on
May 6 2024 nearly 100,000 Palestinians
were ordered by Israel to evacuate the
Eastern portion of
Rafa and relocate to Al maasi and kanun
areas ahead of a planned military
offensive
the military ground offensive in Rafa
which Israel started on May 7
2024 is still ongoing and has led to new
evacuation
orders as a result according to United
Nations reports nearly
800,000 people have been displaced from
Rafa as at May 18 2024
the court considered that the
aforementioned
developments which are exceptionally
grave in particular the military
offensive in Rafa and resulting repeated
large scale displacement of already
extremely vulnerable Palestinian
population in the Gaza Strip constitute
a change in the situation within the
meaning of article 76 of the rules of
court
the court is also of the view that
provisional measures indicated in its
order of March 28
2024 as well as those reaffirmed therein
do not fully address the
consequences arising from the change in
the situation previously
explained thus justifying the
modification of these
measures however in order to modify its
earlier decision concerning provisional
measures the court must still satisfy
itself that the general conditions let
down in article 41 of the statute of the
Court are met in the current circum
situation the court next turns to the
conditions for the indication of
provisional
measures it records that in its orders
of January 26 2024 and March 28th
2024 it concluded that Prima fashi it
had jurisdiction pursuant to article 9
of the genocide convention to entertain
the
case the court sees no reason to revisit
that conclusion for the purposes of
deciding on the present
request in the order of January 26 2024
the court also found that at least some
of the rights claimed by South Africa
under the jasad convention and for which
it was seeking protection were
plausible namely the right of the
Palestinians in Gaza to be protected
from acts of genocide and related
prohibited acts mentioned in article 3
and the right of South Africa to seek
Israel's compliance with the latter's
obligation under the convention
the court saw no reason to revisit this
conclusion in its order of March 28
2024 the court
likewise sees no reason to do so for the
purposes of deciding on the present
request it further considers that by
their very nature at least some of the
provisional measures sought pursuant to
the present re Quest are aimed at
preserving the rights claimed by the
applicant that the court has found to be
plausible the court must next consider
whether the current situation entails a
risk of irreparable prejudice to the
plausible rights claimed by South Africa
and whether there is
urgency the court recalls in this regard
that it has previously included that in
view of the fundamental values so to be
protected by the genocide convention the
plausible rights in question in these
proceedings are of such a nature that
prejudices to them is capable of causing
irreparable
harm the court recalls that on May 7
2024 Israel began a military offensive
in Rafa following weeks of intensified
bombardment and that as a result
approximately 800,000
Palestinians were displaced from Rafa as
at May 18
2024 the court notes that senior United
Nations officials have consistently
underscored the immense risks associated
with the military offensive in
Rafa for for instance on May 3
2024 the spokesperson of the office for
the coordination of humanitarian Affairs
warned that an assault on rafah would
put I quote hundreds of thousands of
people at imminent risk of death end of
quot and would severely impact the
humanitarian operation in entire Gaza
Strip which is run primarily out of Rafa
on May 6
2024 the United Nations children fund
indicated that about half of the
approximately 1.2 million Palestinians
Sheltering in Rafa were children and
warned that military operations therein
would result in I quote the few
remaining basic services and
infrastructure they need to survive
being totally destroyed end of
quote the United Nations sources
indicate that the aforementioned risks
have started to
materialize and will
intensify even further if the operation
continues for instance on May 8th
2024 the director general of the World
Health Organization stated the alar
hospital one of the last remaining
medical facilities in the Rafa governor
was no longer functional due to the
ongoing hostilities in its
vicinity on May 17 2024 the world food
program warned that it had been
able to access its warehous in Rafa for
over it hadn't been able to access its
warh houses in Rafa for over a week and
observed that I quote the incursion into
Rafa is a significant set back to recent
mod modest progress on access and of
quot on the basis of information before
it the court is not convinced that the
evacuation efforts and related measures
that Israel affirms to have undertaken
to enhance the security of civilians in
the gasa strip and in particular those
recently displaced from the governor are
sufficient to alleviate the immense risk
to which the Palestinian population is
exposed as a result of the military
offensive in
Rafa the court observed for instance
that according to a statement by the
commissioner
General of the United Nations relief and
works Agency for Palestine refugees in
the near East Mr Philip lazarini on May
18 2024 I quote the areas that peoples
are fleeing to now do not have Safe
Water Supplies or sanitation
facilities al- maasi as one example is a
Sandy 14 Square kilm agricultur land
where people are left out in the open
with little to no buildings or roads it
lacks the minimal conditions to provide
emergency humanitarian assistance in a
safe and dignified manner
end of
Court the court observed that Israel has
not provided sufficient information
concerning the safety of the population
during the evacuation process or the
availability in al- maasi area of the
necessary amount of Water
Sanitation food medicine and shelter for
the 800,000 Palestinians that have
evacuated thus far
consequently the court is of view that
Israel has not sufficiently addressed
and dispelled the concerns raised by its
military offensive in
Rafa in light of the consideration set
out in the preceding sections of the
order and taking account of the
provisional measures indicated in its
orders of January 26
2024 and March 28 2024
the court finds that the current
situation arising from Israel's military
offensive in Rafa entails a further risk
of irreparable prejudice to the
plausible rights claimed by South Africa
and that there is urgency in the sense
that there exists a real and imminent
risk that such Prejudice will be caused
before the Court gives its final
decision the court concludes on the
basis of the aforementioned
considerations that the circumstances of
the case required to modify its decision
set out in its order of March 28
2024 the court recalls that in
accordance with article 75 paragraph 2
of its rules when a request for the
indication of provision measures has
been made it has the power under its
statute to indicate measures that are
not in whole or in part other than those
requested in the present case having
considered the terms of the provisional
measures requested by South Africa and
the circumstances of the
case the court found that the measures
to be indicated need not be identical to
those
requested the court consider that in
Conformity with obligations under the
genocide convention is Israel must
immediately hold its military offens and
any other action in the Rafa
Governor which may inflict on the
Palestinian group in Gaza conditions of
life that could bring about its physical
destruction in whole or in
part the court recalls that it that in
its order of January 26
2024 it ordered Israel inter area to I
quote take effective measures to prevent
the destruction and ensure the
preservation of evidence related to
allegations of Acts within the scope of
Article 2 and article 3 of the genocide
convention end of
quote in the present
circumstances the court is also of the
view that in order to preserve evidence
related to allegations of Acts falling
within the scope of Article 2 and
article three of the genocide convention
Israel must take effective measures to
ensure the
unimpeded access to the Gaza Strip of
any Commission of inquiry fact finding
Mission or other investigative body
mandated by competent organs of the
United Nations to investigate
allegations of
genocide the court also considers that
the catastrophic situation in
Gaza confirmed the need for the
immediate and effective implementation
of the measures indicated in its orders
of January 26 2024 and March 28th
2024 which are applicable throughout the
Gaza Strip including in
Rafa in these circumstances the court
finds it necessary to reaffirm the
measures indicated in those
orders in so doing the Court wishes to
emphasize that the measure indicated in
paragraph
512a of its order of March 28
2024 requiring I quote the unhindered
provision at scale by all concerned of
urgently needed basic services and
humanitarian assistance and of course
necess states that the respondent
maintain open land Crossing points and
in particular the Rafa Crossing
in view of the specific provisional
measures it has decided to indicate the
court considered that Israel must submit
a report to the court on all measures
taken to give effect to this order
within one month from the date of this
order the report so provided will then
be communicated to South Africa which
shall be given the opportunity to submit
to the court its commands thereon
the court recalls that its orders on
provisional measures under article 41 of
the statute have binding effect and thus
create International legal obligations
for any party to whom the provisional
measures are
addressed the court underlined that the
present order is without prejudice to
any findings concerning the respondent's
compliance with the orders of January 26
2024 and March 28
2024 in its orders of January 26 2024
and March 28th
2024 the court expressed its grave
concern over the fate of the hostages
abducted during the attacks in Israel on
October 7 2023 and hence since then by
Hamas and other armed group and called
for their immediate and unconditional
release
the court finds it deeply troubling that
many of these hostages remain in
captivity and reiterate its SC for their
immediate and unconditional
release I shall Now read out the
operative part of the order for these
reasons the court by 13 vots to
two reaffirms the provisional measures
indicated in its orders of 26th January
2024 and March 28th
2024 which should be immediately and
effectively
implemented in favor president Salam
judges Abraham
YF bandari iwasawa n
charwell brand Gomez roblo Cleveland
oresco CL
against vice president subu judge adok
Barak two indicates the following
provisional measures the states of
Israel shall in Conformity with its
obligation under the convention on the
pre prevention and Punishment of the
crime of genocide and in view of the
worsening conditions of Life faced by
civilian in the
Governor a by 13 VES to
two immediately hold its military
offensive and any other action in the
RAF Governor which may inflict on the
Palestinian group in Gaza conditions of
life that would bring about its physical
destruction in whole or in
part in favor president Salam judges
Abraham YF
bandari iwazawa
n Charlesworth BR Gomez Roo Cleveland
oresco
CL against vice president cind judge
adok
Barak by 13 votes to
two maintain open the Rafa Crossing for
unhindered provision at scale of
urgently needed basic services and
humanitarian
assistance in favor president Salam
judges Abraham Yu sh bandari iwasawa n
Charlesworth BR
kblo Cleveland uresco
CL against vice president CND judge ad
hok
Barack C by 30 votes to
two take effective measures to ensure
the unimpeded access to the Gaza Strip
of any Commission of
inquiry fact finding Mission or other
investigative body mandated by competent
organs of the United Nations to
investigate allegations of
genocide in favor president Salam judges
Abraham yo
bandari iwasawa n Charlesworth BR kblo
Cleveland oresco
CL against vice president seu judge adok
Barak
three by 13 votes to two decides that
the state of Israel shall submit a
report to the court on all measures
taken to give effect to this order
within 1 month as from the date of this
order in
favor president Salam judges Abraham
yusf bandari iwasawa n Charles worth
barand Gomez Roo Cleveland uresco
CL against vice president seutin judge
adok Barak
I shall Now call on the registar to read
the operative part of the order in
French
m m abru madame m
iasa Madame charlesw M BR Gomez roblo
Madame clevand M ores
total M Salam abrahamu Madame Shu m
bandari iasa n Madame Charles swart M
brand Gomez Roo madame clame
Madame bandari
iasa Madame Charlesworth M BR Gomez
roblo Madame Cleveland M ores
M Abraham Yu Madame m
bandara madame Char M bran Gomez Madame
Cleveland
m madame
Madame Shu m bandari iwasawa n Madame
charlesw Miss br
meland M
barok vice president CBU appends a
descending opinion to the order of the
Court judges Nesco and append
declaration to the order of the court
judge adok Barak append a descending
opinion to the order of the Court the
text of the order is a available from
today in typescript it will be available
shortly on the court website the printed
text will be available in due course as
the court has no further business before
it today I declare the sitting closed